.\" $Header$
.\" vim:tw=72:filetype=nroff
.\"
.\"       manpage for slack.conf
.\"
.TH slack.conf 5 2005-05-23 "File formats" 

.SH NAME
slack.conf \- configuration file for slack

.SH DESCRIPTION
The file
.I /etc/slack.conf
contains configuration information for
.BR slack (8)
and its backends.  It should contain one keyword-value pair per line,
separated by an '=' sign.  Keywords must consist solely of capital
letters and underscores.  Values may take any appropriate format, but
must not begin with a space.  Comments start with '#', and all text from
the '#' to the end of a line is ignored.  Trailing whitespace on lines
is ignored.  Empty lines or lines consisting of only whitespace and
comments are ignored.

Valid keywords are:
.TP
\fBSOURCE\fP
The master source for slack roles.
.TP
\fBROOT\fP
The root filesystem into which to install slack roles.  Usually
.RI ' / '.
.TP
\fBROLE_LIST\fP
The location of the role list, which lists the roles to be installed
by default on each host.  This can be a path relative to the source,
or can be an entirely separate location if it starts with a slash or
a hostname (optionally preceeded by user@).
.TP
\fBCACHE\fP
A local cache directory, used as a local mirror of the SOURCE.
.TP
\fBSTAGE\fP
A local staging directory, used as an intermediate stage when installing
files.
.TP
\fBBACKUP_DIR\fP
A directory in which to keep dated backups for rollbacks.

.SH EXAMPLE

A typical file might look like this:

  # slack.conf configuration file
  SOURCE=slack-master:/slack  # source is on a remote
                              # host named "slack-master"
  ROLE_LIST=slack-master:/roles.conf
  ROOT=/
  CACHE=/var/cache/slack
  STAGE=/var/lib/slack/stage
  BACKUP_DIR=/var/lib/slack/backups

.SH FILES
.I /etc/slack.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR slack(8)
