.\" $Header$
.\" vim:tw=72:filetype=nroff
.\"
.\"       manpage for slack.conf
.\"
.TH slack 8 2004-10-22 "Administrative commands" 

.SH NAME
slack \- Sysadmin's lazy autoconfiguration kit

.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBslack\fR [\fIoption ...\fR] [\fIrole ...\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

slack is a master command which coordinates the activities of its
backends, which variously:

.IP \(bu
determine the list of roles to be installed on this server
.IP \(bu
create a local cached copy of the role files from the central repository
.IP \(bu
merge file trees from subroles into a single, unified tree
.IP \(bu
install files onto the local filesystem
.IP \(bu
run scripts before and after installation

.PP
Options you give to slack will be passed along to the backends.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-config FILE\fR
Use the specfied FILE for configuration instead of the default,
.IR /etc/slack.conf .
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-source DIR\fR
Source directory for slack files
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-cache DIR\fR
Local cache directory for slack files
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-stage DIR\fR
Local staging directory for slack files
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-root DIR\fR
Root destination for slack files
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Increase verbosity.  Can be specified multiple times.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a usage statement.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-dry\-run\fR
Don't write any files to disk -- just report what would have been don.
.TP
\fB\-\-role\-list\fR
Role list for
.BR slack-getroles (8).
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-backup\fR
Make backups of existing files in ROOT that are overwritten.
.TP
\fB\-\-backup\-dir\fR
Put backups from the
.B \-\-backup
option into this directory.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
To install all the roles configured in the role list for a server:
.RS
slack
.RE
.PP
To install a specific role:
.RS
slack
.I rolename
.RE
.PP
To test a new role before checking in the changes:
.RS
slack --source 
.IR user @ workstation :/home/ user /.../slack
.I rolename
.RE


.SH FILES
.I /etc/slack.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR slack.conf(5)
